Now the fun stuff.
How are we gonna turn that into
highlighting our diagonals?
But let's look at the relationship of
coordinates of the thing that we clicked
and the thing that we want to highlight.
Here's our starting element
that we've clicked on and
here are the first four coordinates
that we need to highlight.
Got a little bit of spacing off here.
But we are highlighting this element
at (3,1), (3,1) this one at (3,3).
This one at (5,1) and this is at (5,3).
Do you see those coordinates
how they match up?
This is row three column three.
This is row three, column one.
This is row five column one and
row five column three.
What do you notice about the relationship
between the coordinates of these
four elements that are on
the respective diagonals?
What's the relationship between
those coordinate values and
the coordinate value of
the thing that we clicked on?
>> Adding, subtracting.
>> It's just different by one, right?
Take (4,2) and go to (3,1).
That means we subtracted
1 from the row index and
we subtracted 1 from the column index.
Take (4,2) and go to (3,3) that's
subtracting 1 from the row index but
adding 1 to the column index.
Same thing going in the downward
direction, we add 1 to the row index,
subtract 1 from the column
index to get (5,1).
We add 1 to both the row and
column index to get (5,3).
The same would be true all the way up and
down all four directions
along those diagonals.
Each thing along the diagonal is just
a + or- of 1 from the previous one.
Following that?
So that kind of suggests
to us an algorithm for
highlighting the diagonals does it not?
We could start at the selected
tile at the clicked tile and
run some loops in the four directions
Increasing indexes of row and
column or decreasing accordingly
in the four directions.
And that would give us the indexes of
the elements that we need to highlight.
Wouldn't give us the elements yet, but
at least gives us the indexes
that we need to highlight.
Make sense?
Let's switch back to the code editor.
We're gonna do four separate loops,
one for each of these directions, okay?
I'm going to highlight in
the upper left direction.
Okay, you'll see me sometimes
just pointing at my computer and
making sure my left's and rights are not
getting backwards or something like that.
So highlighting in the upper left
direction for you it's this, for
me it's this,
the upper left direction, okay?
So what do we know in the upper left?
We know that both the row index and
the column index decrease
in the up left direction.
So we're going to set ourselves
up with a two variable four loop.
Some of you may be aware that
this syntax can be done,
others may be seeing this for the first
time, but we're gonna have an I and a J.
The I starts at the tiles row index and
the J starts at the tiles column index.
We want to keep going while, And
these are gonna be decreasing.
How do we know when we've
reached the edge of the board?
>> We've reached a minimum or a maximum.
>> And what is the minimum for
the row index and column index?
>> 0.
So while i, which is our row indexing,
while i is greater than or
equal to 0 and
j is greater than or equal to 0.
We wanna keep going in that direction, and
we're going to decrement i and
decrement j.
Single four loop doing both,
Decrementing of the row and
column indexes.
The i and j in this loop is going to
give us the indexes of those elements
along that diagonal but it doesn't
give us the elements themselves.
So to get the element themselves,
we're going to need to call
a function which I will call find tile,
that we pass in the row and
column index two and it gives us
back the DOM element reference.
And assuming that that function exists,
which we'll write in a moment
once we get a reference to it we just
need to add the highlighted class to it.
Does everybody understand
how I wrote that four loop?
Does that one make sense?
It's one of the four loops that we need.
It is the one that is going in
the upward and leftward direction.
I don't know if leftward is a word,
but I'm gonna use it.
To save myself some typing,
I'm gonna duplicate that loop and
I'm gonna go do the up-right direction.
What is different about going
in the upright direction?
My row indexes still decrease, so
I still want to do greater than or
equal to 0 for my row indexes.
But my column indexes increase
when I'm going rightward, right?
So I don't want j greater than or
equal to 0.
What I want j, What should this be?
Not greater than or equal to 0,
it should be, Less than 8 or
less than or equal to 7 if you prefer that
form but I'm gonna use the less than 8.
And j is naught- -, what should it be?
I suppose.
That's the only thing I needed to change
was the condition of when it finishes and
incrementing that one.
And now I'm really lazy.
So to do the other two loops, I'm just
gonna duplicate both of those loops.
For these loops, what changes?
We're changing from up to down, And
that's gonna change our i's, right?
So our i is no longer greater than or
equal to 0.
What's the condition for
i when our row index is increasing?
Less than or equal to 7 or less than or
equal to 8, if you like that, right?
So for both of these loops, I'm gonna
change the i condition to i less than 8.
And for both of these I'm gonna
change it from i-- to i + +.
I've taught this workshop
a dozen times now, and
every workshop, including me,
people get these wrong, okay?
So even though you're trying very
meticulously to get the less than or
greater than,
this is one of those places where it's
easy for us to trip up and get wrong.
Even when you're looking at it and
looking at yours and you're like,
it looks right, it looks right.
I don't see what's wrong.
If we try this and yours breaks,
don't waste any more time on it.
You understand how this works just
grab the copy from the repo, right?
I don't want people sitting here
frustrated because they missed a-- or
something, okay?
As long as you understand conceptually how
I constructed the four different loops.
We're simply either incrementing or
decrementing the row and
the tile indexes respectively, so that
we go in the four respective directions.
And the last thing that we're
gonna need is just this little old
find tile function.
Following?
So let's write our find tile function, and
then we'll test everything and
see how we did, okay?
Remember that find tile,
Receives a row index and a column index.
I'll just call it row and
column to keep things short here.
How are we, given a numerical index,
going to pull out a reference
to the respective DOM element?
There are multiple ways to do this.
Some of them are better than others.
I'm only gonna show you one of them,
but this is not certainly the only way.
You could loop through all of
them until you find an i and
j that match row and column.
I'm gonna use the CSS engine to do it.
Because we have the nth tile selector,
and I have these indexes, and
I'm just gonna construct a CSS selector
that pulls out the respective element.
So that is gonna look like this,
we're gonna use our our
friend query selector all,
I'm sorry query selector not selector all.
We got to do it on document and, Oops,
we're gonna select
the parent element board and
then div, this will be our row.
So we're gonna do nth-tile, And
remember that CSS deals with
indexes in one based so
we're gonna take our row + 1.
So if our row index was 4,
then we want to actually pass the selector
5 because that's how CSS will see it.
And then we'll do another
direct descendant.
Actually, since this is a template string
I'll just do these on separate lines.
So it's easier for you to read.
So this was selecting the row element.
Now we wanna select
the tile inside of that.
So we've got another direct descendant and
we'll do nth tile.
And we'll do column + 1.
This offloads to the CSS engine, all
of the work of finding the DOM element.
And it goes on the assumption
that the CSS engine is going to
be more efficient at doing that
than my four loops would be.
If we haven't made a mistake,
hopefully we should
be able to save this file and
switch over to the browser.
Refresh our page, click on an item,
and there's our highlighted tiles.
>> First try.
No mistakes.
>> Doesn't happen very often.
>> They call them first try tile.
>> Somebody mark this date
because we'll wanna remember
the date that I wrote code and
didn't make a mistake.
Turn up very often.
Like I said don't bang your head against
too much if it's like, it's missing
one of the diagonals or it's throwing
an out of bounds are, or something.
It's almost certainly,
you have missed doing a- -, or
you missed doing a less than,
or something like that.
That happens all the time with this stuff.
This is not the kind of code that I'd like
to check into production and say, Hey,
please keep this code around forever cause
it's hard to read, hard to maintain.
But what does it do critically?
It gets us to a first step, a working
algorithm which is out baseline that we
can work from to improve the code, improve
the optimization, improve the readability.
This is the code as it sits
in the option one branch.
So if for
some reason yours missed the character
somewhere it's not quite working.
As long as you feel comfortable
with how we did it and
what the concept was that approached it,
stash your changes, and
check out the option one branch so
that's the correct starting point for
the next work that we'll do.
>> What another way to do this
roll call stuff based on arrays
without the CSS selector,
which approach would you use?
>> Yes, you could have done
this with the tile nodes,
arrays and use those indexes that way.
So you could have said,
original board element,
dot tile nodes dot tile nodes of call.
It absolutely could have done it that way.
My impression, or my guess, is that both
of those are gonna perform about the same
which is to say that they're quite fast
because they're using built in stuff.
I don't think that the CSS
selector is gonna be any less slow
than the array reference because
those aren't real arrays.
Those are DOM node lists.
If they were real native
JavaScript arrays,
then it would be much faster to access
the real native JavaScript array element.
But we don't yet
have an array in JavaScript of those,
what we have is these DOM element lists.
So, I don't think that there's gonna be
much of a performance difference between
the two, but
it's certainly a valid approach if
you like that style of code better.